Criminal Law Definitions (California)  
 
Rape (CA Penal Code Chapter 1 Section 261)  
(a) Rape is an act of sexual intercourse accomplished under any of the following circumstances:  
(1) If a person who is not the spouse of the person committing the act is incapable, because of a 
mental disorder or developmental or physical disability, of giving legal consent, and this is 
known or reasonably should be known to the person committing the act . Notwithstanding the 
existence of a conservatorship pursuant to the provisions of the Lanterman -Petris -Short Act 
(Part 1 (commencing with Section 5000) of Division 5 of the Welfare and Institutions Code), the 
prosecuting attorney shall prove, as an elemen t of the crime, that a mental disorder or 
developmental or physical disability rendered the alleged victim incapable of giving consent.  
This paragraph does not preclude the prosecution of a spouse committing the act from being 
prosecuted under any other pa ragraph of this subdivision or any other law.  
(2) If it is accomplished against a person’s will by means of force, violence, duress, menace, or 
fear of immediate and unlawful bodily injury on the person or another.  
(3) If a person is prevented from resisting by any intoxicating or anesthetic substance, or any 
controlled substance, and this condition was known, or reasonably should have been known by 
the accused.  
(4) If a person is at the time unconscious of the nature of t he act, and this is known to the 
accused. As used in this paragraph, “unconscious of the nature of the act” means incapable of 
resisting because the victim meets any one of the following conditions:  
(A) Was unconscious or asleep.  
(B) Was not aware, knowing , perceiving, or cognizant that the act occurred.  
(C) Was not aware, knowing, perceiving, or cognizant of the essential characteristics of the act 
due to the perpetrator’s fraud in fact.  
(D) Was not aware, knowing, perceiving, or cognizant of the essential  characteristics of the act 
due to the perpetrator’s fraudulent representation that the sexual penetration served a 
professional purpose when it served no professional purpose.  
(5) If a person submits under the belief that the person committing the act is someone known 
to the victim other than the accused, and this belief is induced by any artifice, pretense, or 
concealment practiced by the accused, with intent to induce the belief.  

(6) If the act is accomplished against the victim’s will by threatening to retaliate in the future 
against the victim or any other person, and there is a reasonable possibility that the perpetrator 
will execute the threat. As used in this paragraph, “threatening  to retaliate” means a threat to 
kidnap or falsely imprison, or to inflict extreme pain, serious bodily injury, or death.  
(7) If the act is accomplished against the victim’s will by threatening to use the authority of a 
public official to incarcerate, arre st, or deport the victim or another, and the victim has a 
reasonable belief that the perpetrator is a public official. As used in this paragraph, “public 
official” means a person employed by a governmental agency who has the authority, as part of 
that posi tion, to incarcerate, arrest, or deport another. The perpetrator does not actually have 
to be a public official.  
(b) For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:   
(1) “Duress” means a direct or implied threat of force, violence, danger, or retribution sufficient 
to coerce a reasonable person of ordinary susceptibilities to perform an act which otherwise 
would not have been performed, or acquiesce in an act to which one ot herwise would not have 
submitted. The total circumstances, including the age of the victim, and his or her relationship 
to the defendant, are factors to consider in appraising the existence of duress.  
(2) “Menace” means any threat, declaration, or act that shows an intention to inflict an injury 
upon another.  
 
Sodomy (CA Penal Code Chapter 1 Section 286)  
Sodomy is sexual conduct consisting of contact between the penis of one person and the anus 
of another person. Any sexual penetration, however slight, is s ufficient to complete the crime 
of sodomy.  
(b) (1) Except as provided in Section 288, any person who participates in an act of sodomy with 
another person who is under 18 years of age shall be punished by imprisonment in the state 
prison, or in a county jai l for not more than one year.  
(2) Except as provided in Section 288, any person over 21 years of age who participates in an 
act of sodomy with another person who is under 16 years of age shall be guilty of a felony.  
(c) (1) Any person who participates in an act of sodomy with another person who is under 14 
years of age and more than 10 years younger than he or she shall be punished by imprisonment 
in the state prison for three, six, or eight years.  

(2) (A) Any person who commits an act of s odomy when the act is accomplished against the 
victim’s will by means of force, violence, duress, menace, or fear of immediate and unlawful 
bodily injury on the victim or another person shall be punished by imprisonment in the state 
prison for three, six, or eight years.  
(B) Any person who commits an act of sodomy with another person who is under 14 years of 
age when the act is accomplished against the victim’s will by means of force, violence, duress, 
menace, or fear of immediate and unlawful bodily injury  on the victim or another person shall 
be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for 9, 11, or 13 years.  
(C) Any person who commits an act of sodomy with another person who is a minor 14 years of 
age or older when the act is accomplished against the victim’s will by means of force, violence, 
duress, menace, or fear of immediate and unlawful bodily injury on the victim or another 
person shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for 7, 9, or 11 years.  
(3) Any person who commits an act of sod omy where the act is accomplished against the 
victim’s will by threatening to retaliate in the future against the victim or any other person, and 
there is a reasonable possibility that the perpetrator will execute the threat, shall be punished 
by imprisonm ent in the state prison for three, six, or eight years.  
(d) (1) Any person who, while voluntarily acting in concert with another person, either 
personally or aiding and abetting that other person, commits an act of sodomy when the act is 
accomplished again st the victim’s will by means of force or fear of immediate and unlawful 
bodily injury on the victim or another person or where the act is accomplished against the 
victim’s will by threatening to retaliate in the future against the victim or any other pers on, and 
there is a reasonable possibility that the perpetrator will execute the threat, shall be punished 
by imprisonment in the state prison for five, seven, or nine years.  
(2) Any person who, while voluntarily acting in concert with another person, eithe r personally 
or aiding and abetting that other person, commits an act of sodomy upon a victim who is under 
14 years of age, when the act is accomplished against the victim’s will by means of force or fear 
of immediate and unlawful bodily injury on the vict im or another person, shall be punished by 
imprisonment in the state prison for 10, 12, or 14 years.  
(3) Any person who, while voluntarily acting in concert with another person, either personally 
or aiding and abetting that other person, commits an act of sodomy upon a victim who is a 
minor 14 years of age or older, when the act is accomplished against the victim’s will by means 
of force or fear of immediate and unlawful bodily injury on the victim or another person, shall 
be punished by imprisonment in the  state prison for 7, 9, or 11 years.  

(e) Any person who participates in an act of sodomy with any person of any age while confined 
in any state prison, as defined in Section 4504, or in any local detention facility, as defined in 
Section 6031.4, shall be p unished by imprisonment in the state prison, or in a county jail for not 
more than one year.  
(f) Any person who commits an act of sodomy, and the victim is at the time unconscious of the 
nature of the act and this is known to the person committing the act, shall be punished by 
imprisonment in the state prison for three, six, or eight years. As used in this subdivision, 
“unconscious of the nature of the act” means incapable of resisting because the victim meets 
one of the following conditi ons:  
(1) Was unconscious or asleep.  
(2) Was not aware, knowing, perceiving, or cognizant that the act occurred.  
(3) Was not aware, knowing, perceiving, or cognizant of the essential characteristics of the act 
due to the perpetrator’s fraud in fact.  
(4) Was  not aware, knowing, perceiving, or cognizant of the essential characteristics of the act 
due to the perpetrator’s fraudulent representation that the sexual penetration served a 
professional purpose when it served no professional purpose.  
(g) Except as pro vided in subdivision (h), a person who commits an act of sodomy, and the 
victim is at the time incapable, because of a mental disorder or developmental or physical 
disability, of giving legal consent, and this is known or reasonably should be known to the 
person committing the act, shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for three, six, 
or eight years. Notwithstanding the existence of a conservatorship pursuant to the Lanterman -
Petris -Short Act (Part 1 (commencing with Section 5000) of Divisio n 5 of the Welfare and 
Institutions Code), the prosecuting attorney shall prove, as an element of the crime, that a 
mental disorder or developmental or physical disability rendered the alleged victim incapable of 
giving consent.  
(h) Any person who commits an act of sodomy, and the victim is at the time incapable, because 
of a mental disorder or developmental or physical disability, of giving legal consent, and this is 
known or reasonably should be known to the person committing the act, and both the 
defenda nt and the victim are at the time confined in a state hospital for the care and treatment 
of the mentally disordered or in any other public or private facility for the care and treatment 
of the mentally disordered approved by a county mental health directo r, shall be punished by 
imprisonment in the state prison, or in a county jail for not more than one year. 
Notwithstanding the existence of a conservatorship pursuant to the Lanterman -Petris -Short Act 
(Part 1 (commencing with Section 5000) of Division 5 of the Welfare and Institutions Code), the 

prosecuting attorney shall prove, as an element of the crime, that a mental disorder or 
developmental or physical disability rendered the alleged victim incapable of giving legal 
consent.  
(i) Any person who commits a n act of sodomy, where the victim is prevented from resisting by 
an intoxicating or anesthetic substance, or any controlled substance, and this condition was 
known, or reasonably should have been known by the accused, shall be punished by 
imprisonment in t he state prison for three, six, or eight years.  
(j) Any person who commits an act of sodomy, where the victim submits under the belief that 
the person committing the act is someone known to the victim other than the accused, and this 
belief is induced by a ny artifice, pretense, or concealment practiced by the accused, with intent 
to induce the belief, shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for three, six, or 
eight years.  
(k) Any person who commits an act of sodomy, where the act is accomplish ed against the 
victim’s will by threatening to use the authority of a public official to incarcerate, arrest, or 
deport the victim or another, and the victim has a reasonable belief that the perpetrator is a 
public official, shall be punished by imprisonme nt in the state prison for three, six, or eight 
years.  
As used in this subdivision, “public official” means a person employed by a governmental 
agency who has the authority, as part of that position, to incarcerate, arrest, or deport another. 
The perpetrat or does not actually have to be a public official.  
(l) As used in subdivisions (c) and (d), “threatening to retaliate” means a threat to kidnap or 
falsely imprison, or inflict extreme pain, serious bodily injury, or death.  
 
Oral Copulation (CA Penal Code C hapter 1 Section 287)  
(a) Oral copulation is the act of copulating the mouth of one person with the sexual organ or 
anus of another person.  
(b) (1) Except as provided in Section 288, any person who participates in an act of oral 
copulation with another per son who is under 18 years of age shall be punished by 
imprisonment in the state prison, or in a county jail for a period of not more than one year.  
(2) Except as provided in Section 288, any person over 21 years of age who participates in an 
act of oral co pulation with another person who is under 16 years of age is guilty of a felony.  

(c) (1) Any person who participates in an act of oral copulation with another person who is 
under 14 years of age and more than 10 years younger than he or she shall be punish ed by 
imprisonment in the state prison for three, six, or eight years.  
(2) (A) Any person who commits an act of oral copulation when the act is accomplished against 
the victim’s will by means of force, violence, duress, menace, or fear of immediate and unlawful 
bodily injury on the victim or another person shall be punished by imprisonment in the state 
prison for three, six, or eight years.  
(B) Any person who commits an act of oral copulation upon a person who is under 14 years of 
age, when  the act is accomplished against the victim’s will by means of force, violence, duress, 
menace, or fear of immediate and unlawful bodily injury on the victim or another person, shall 
be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for 8, 10, or 12 years.  
(C) Any person who commits an act of oral copulation upon a minor who is 14 years of age or 
older, when the act is accomplished against the victim’s will by means of force, violence, 
duress, menace, or fear of immediate and unlawful bodily injury on the vic tim or another 
person, shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for 6, 8, or 10 years.  
(3) Any person who commits an act of oral copulation where the act is accomplished against the 
victim’s will by threatening to retaliate in the future again st the victim or any other person, and 
there is a reasonable possibility that the perpetrator will execute the threat, shall be punished 
by imprisonment in the state prison for three, six, or eight years.  
(d) (1) Any person who, while voluntarily acting in  concert with another person, either 
personally or by aiding and abetting that other person, commits an act of oral copulation (A) 
when the act is accomplished against the victim’s will by means of force or fear of immediate 
and unlawful bodily injury on t he victim or another person, or (B) where the act is accomplished 
against the victim’s will by threatening to retaliate in the future against the victim or any other 
person, and there is a reasonable possibility that the perpetrator will execute the threat , or (C) 
where the victim is at the time incapable, because of a mental disorder or developmental or 
physical disability, of giving legal consent, and this is known or reasonably should be known to 
the person committing the act, shall be punished by impris onment in the state prison for five, 
seven, or nine years. Notwithstanding the appointment of a conservator with respect to the 
victim pursuant to the provisions of the Lanterman -Petris -Short Act (Part 1 (commencing with 
Section 5000) of Division 5 of the Welfare and Institutions Code), the prosecuting attorney shall 
prove, as an element of the crime described under paragraph (3), that a mental disorder or 
developmental or physical disability rendered the alleged victim incapable of giving legal 
consent.  

(2) Any person who, while voluntarily acting in concert with another person, either personally 
or aiding and abetting that other person, commits an act of oral copulation upon a victim who 
is under 14 years of age, when the act is accomplished against the vi ctim’s will by means of 
force or fear of immediate and unlawful bodily injury on the victim or another person, shall be 
punished by imprisonment in the state prison for 10, 12, or 14 years.  
(3) Any person who, while voluntarily acting in concert with anoth er person, either personally 
or aiding and abetting that other person, commits an act of oral copulation upon a victim who 
is a minor 14 years of age or older, when the act is accomplished against the victim’s will by 
means of force or fear of immediate an d unlawful bodily injury on the victim or another person, 
shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for 8, 10, or 12 years.  
(e) Any person who participates in an act of oral copulation while confined in any state prison, 
as defined in Section 4 504 or in any local detention facility as defined in Section 6031.4, shall be 
punished by imprisonment in the state prison, or in a county jail for a period of not more than 
one year.  
(f) Any person who commits an act of oral copulation, and the victim is at the time unconscious 
of the nature of the act and this is known to the person committing the act, shall be punished 
by imprisonment in the state prison for a period of three, six, or eight years. As used in this 
subdivision, “unconscious of the nature o f the act” means incapable of resisting because the 
victim meets one of the following conditions:  
(1) Was unconscious or asleep.  
(2) Was not aware, knowing, perceiving, or cognizant that the act occurred.  
(3) Was not aware, knowing, perceiving, or cognizan t of the essential characteristics of the act 
due to the perpetrator’s fraud in fact.  
(4) Was not aware, knowing, perceiving, or cognizant of the essential characteristics of the act 
due to the perpetrator’s fraudulent representation that the oral copulation served a 
professional purpose when it served no professional purpose.  
(g) Except as provided in subdivision (h), any person who commits an act of oral copulation, and 
the victim is at the time incapable, because of a mental disorder or developme ntal or physical 
disability, of giving legal consent, and this is known or reasonably should be known to the 
person committing the act, shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison, for three, six, 
or eight years. Notwithstanding the existence of a conservatorship pursuant to the provisions of 
the Lanterman -Petris -Short Act (Part 1 (commencing with Section 5000) of Division 5 of the 
Welfare and Institutions Code), the prosecuting attorney shall prove, as an element of the 

crime, that a mental disor der or developmental or physical disability rendered the alleged 
victim incapable of giving consent.  
(h) Any person who commits an act of oral copulation, and the victim is at the time incapable, 
because of a mental disorder or developmental or physical di sability, of giving legal consent, 
and this is known or reasonably should be known to the person committing the act, and both 
the defendant and the victim are at the time confined in a state hospital for the care and 
treatment of the mentally disordered or  in any other public or private facility for the care and 
treatment of the mentally disordered approved by a county mental health director, shall be 
punished by imprisonment in the state prison, or in a county jail for a period of not more than 
one year. N otwithstanding the existence of a conservatorship pursuant to the provisions of the 
Lanterman -Petris -Short Act (Part 1 (commencing with Section 5000) of Division 5 of the Welfare 
and Institutions Code), the prosecuting attorney shall prove, as an element o f the crime, that a 
mental disorder or developmental or physical disability rendered the alleged victim incapable of 
giving legal consent.  
(i) Any person who commits an act of oral copulation, where the victim is prevented from 
resisting by any intoxicatin g or anesthetic substance, or any controlled substance, and this 
condition was known, or reasonably should have been known by the accused, shall be punished 
by imprisonment in the state prison for a period of three, six, or eight years.  
(j) Any person who commits an act of oral copulation, where the victim submits under the 
belief that the person committing the act is someone known to the victim other than the 
accused, and this belief is induced by any artifice, pretense, or concealment practiced by the 
accused, with intent to induce the belief, shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison 
for a period of three, six, or eight years.  
(k) Any person who commits an act of oral copulation, where the act is accomplished against 
the victim’s will by threa tening to use the authority of a public official to incarcerate, arrest, or 
deport the victim or another, and the victim has a reasonable belief that the perpetrator is a 
public official, shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for a period o f three, six, 
or eight years.  
As used in this subdivision, “public official” means a person employed by a governmental 
agency who has the authority, as part of that position, to incarcerate, arrest, or deport another. 
The perpetrator does not actually have  to be a public official.  
(l) As used in subdivisions (c) and (d), “threatening to retaliate” means a threat to kidnap or 
falsely imprison, or to inflict extreme pain, serious bodily injury, or death.  
   

Bigamy, Incest, and the Crime against Nature (CA Pen al Code Chapter 1 Section 285 and Section 
289)  
Section 285  
Persons being within the degrees of consanguinity within which marriages are declared by law 
to be incestuous and void, who intermarry with each other, or who being 14 years of age or 
older, commit fornication or adultery with each other, are punishable by imprisonment in the 
state prison.  
Section 289  
(a) (1) (A) Any person who commits an act of sexual penetration when the act is accomplished 
against the victim’s will by means of force, violen ce, duress, menace, or fear of immediate and 
unlawful bodily injury on the victim or another person shall be punished by imprisonment in the 
state prison for three, six, or eight years.  
(B) Any person who commits an act of sexual penetration upon a child who is under 14 years of 
age, when the act is accomplished against the victim’s will by means of force, violence, duress, 
menace, or fear of immediate and unlawful bodily injury on the victim or another person, shall 
be punished by imprisonment in th e state prison for 8, 10, or 12 years.  
(C) Any person who commits an act of sexual penetration upon a minor who is 14 years of age 
or older, when the act is accomplished against the victim’s will by means of force, violence, 
duress, menace, or fear of imme diate and unlawful bodily injury on the victim or another 
person, shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for 6, 8, or 10 years.  
(D) This paragraph does not preclude prosecution under Section 269, Section 288.7, or any 
other provision of law.  
(2) Any person who commits an act of sexual penetration when the act is accomplished against 
the victim’s will by threatening to retaliate in the future against the victim or any other person, 
and there is a reasonable possibility that the perpetrator wil l execute the threat, shall be 
punished by imprisonment in the state prison for three, six, or eight years.  
(b) Except as provided in subdivision (c), any person who commits an act of sexual penetration, 
and the victim is at the time incapable, because of a mental disorder or developmental or 
physical disability, of giving legal consent, and this is known or reasonably should be known to 
the person committing the act or causing the act to be committed, shall be punished by 
imprisonment in the state prison f or three, six, or eight years. Notwithstanding the 
appointment of a conservator with respect to the victim pursuant to the provisions of the 
Lanterman -Petris -Short Act (Part 1 (commencing with Section 5000) of Division 5 of the Welfare 
and Institutions Cod e), the prosecuting attorney shall prove, as an element of the crime, that a 

mental disorder or developmental or physical disability rendered the alleged victim incapable of 
giving legal consent.  
(c) Any person who commits an act of sexual penetration, and  the victim is at the time 
incapable, because of a mental disorder or developmental or physical disability, of giving legal 
consent, and this is known or reasonably should be known to the person committing the act or 
causing the act to be committed and bot h the defendant and the victim are at the time 
confined in a state hospital for the care and treatment of the mentally disordered or in any 
other public or private facility for the care and treatment of the mentally disordered approved 
by a county mental h ealth director, shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison, or in 
a county jail for a period of not more than one year. Notwithstanding the existence of a 
conservatorship pursuant to the provisions of the Lanterman -Petris -Short Act (Part 1 
(comm encing with Section 5000) of Division 5 of the Welfare and Institutions Code), the 
prosecuting attorney shall prove, as an element of the crime, that a mental disorder or 
developmental or physical disability rendered the alleged victim incapable of giving legal 
consent.  
(d) Any person who commits an act of sexual penetration, and the victim is at the time 
unconscious of the nature of the act and this is known to the person committing the act or 
causing the act to be committed, shall be punished by imprisonm ent in the state prison for 
three, six, or eight years. As used in this subdivision, “unconscious of the nature of the act” 
means incapable of resisting because the victim meets one of the following conditions:  
(1) Was unconscious or asleep.  
(2) Was not aw are, knowing, perceiving, or cognizant that the act occurred.  
(3) Was not aware, knowing, perceiving, or cognizant of the essential characteristics of the act 
due to the perpetrator’s fraud in fact.  
(4) Was not aware, knowing, perceiving, or cognizant of t he essential characteristics of the act 
due to the perpetrator’s fraudulent representation that the sexual penetration served a 
professional purpose when it served no professional purpose.  
(e) Any person who commits an act of sexual penetration when the vi ctim is prevented from 
resisting by any intoxicating or anesthetic substance, or any controlled substance, and this 
condition was known, or reasonably should have been known by the accused, shall be punished 
by imprisonment in the state prison for a period  of three, six, or eight years.  
(f) Any person who commits an act of sexual penetration when the victim submits under the 
belief that the person committing the act or causing the act to be committed is someone 

known to the victim other than the accused, an d this belief is induced by any artifice, pretense, 
or concealment practiced by the accused, with intent to induce the belief, shall be punished by 
imprisonment in the state prison for a period of three, six, or eight years.  
(g) Any person who commits an a ct of sexual penetration when the act is accomplished against 
the victim’s will by threatening to use the authority of a public official to incarcerate, arrest, or 
deport the victim or another, and the victim has a reasonable belief that the perpetrator is  a 
public official, shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for a period of three, six, 
or eight years.  
As used in this subdivision, “public official” means a person employed by a governmental 
agency who has the authority, as part of that pos ition, to incarcerate, arrest, or deport another. 
The perpetrator does not actually have to be a public official.  
(h) Except as provided in Section 288, any person who participates in an act of sexual 
penetration with another person who is under 18 years o f age shall be punished by 
imprisonment in the state prison or in a county jail for a period of not more than one year.  
(i) Except as provided in Section 288, any person over 21 years of age who participates in an act 
of sexual penetration with another per son who is under 16 years of age shall be guilty of a 
felony.  
(j) Any person who participates in an act of sexual penetration with another person who is 
under 14 years of age and who is more than 10 years younger than he or she shall be punished 
by impriso nment in the state prison for three, six, or eight years.  
(k) As used in this section:  
(1) “Sexual penetration” is the act of causing the penetration, however slight, of the genital or 
anal opening of any person or causing another person to so penetrate th e defendant’s or 
another person’s genital or anal opening for the purpose of sexual arousal, gratification, or 
abuse by any foreign object, substance, instrument, or device, or by any unknown object.  
(2) “Foreign object, substance, instrument, or device” s hall include any part of the body, except 
a sexual organ.  
(3) “Unknown object” shall include any foreign object, substance, instrument, or device, or any 
part of the body, including a penis, when it is not known whether penetration was by a penis or 
by a f oreign object, substance, instrument, or device, or by any other part of the body.  
(l) As used in subdivision (a), “threatening to retaliate” means a threat to kidnap or falsely 
imprison, or inflict extreme pain, serious bodily injury or death.  

(m) As used  in this section, “victim” includes any person who the defendant causes to penetrate 
the genital or anal opening of the defendant or another person or whose genital or anal 
opening is caused to be penetrated by the defendant or another person and who other wise 
qualifies as a victim under the requirements of this section.  
 
Fondling (CA Penal Code Chapter 9. Section 243.4, Assault and Battery)  
(a) Any person who touches an intimate part of another person while that person is unlawfully 
restrained by the accused or an accomplice, and if the touching is against the will of the person 
touched and is for the purpose of sexual arousal, sexual gratification, or sexual abuse, is guilty 
of sexual battery. A violation of this subdivision is punishable by imprisonm ent in a county jail 
for not more than one year, and by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000); or by 
imprisonment in the state prison for two, three, or four years, and by a fine not exceeding ten 
thousand dollars ($10,000).  
(b) Any person who touches an intimate part of another person who is institutionalized for 
medical treatment and who is seriously disabled or medically incapacitated, if the touching is 
against the will of the person touched, and if the touching is for the purpose  of sexual arousal, 
sexual gratification, or sexual abuse, is guilty of sexual battery. A violation of this subdivision is 
punishable by imprisonment in a county jail for not more than one year, and by a fine not 
exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000); or  by imprisonment in the state prison for two, three, 
or four years, and by a fine not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000).  
(c) Any person who touches an intimate part of another person for the purpose of sexual 
arousal, sexual gratification, or sexual  abuse, and the victim is at the time unconscious of the 
nature of the act because the perpetrator fraudulently represented that the touching served a 
professional purpose, is guilty of sexual battery. A violation of this subdivision is punishable by 
impri sonment in a county jail for not more than one year, and by a fine not exceeding two 
thousand dollars ($2,000); or by imprisonment in the state prison for two, three, or four years, 
and by a fine not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000).  
(d) Any person  who, for the purpose of sexual arousal, sexual gratification, or sexual abuse, 
causes another, against that person’s will while that person is unlawfully restrained either by 
the accused or an accomplice, or is institutionalized for medical treatment and is seriously 
disabled or medically incapacitated, to masturbate or touch an intimate part of either of those 
persons or a third person, is guilty of sexual battery. A violation of this subdivision is punishable 
by imprisonment in a county jail for not more  than one year, and by a fine not exceeding two 
thousand dollars ($2,000); or by imprisonment in the state prison for two, three, or four years, 
and by a fine not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000).  

(e)(1)  Any person who touches an intimate part of a nother person, if the touching is against the 
will of the person touched, and is for the specific purpose of sexual arousal, sexual gratification, 
or sexual abuse, is guilty of misdemeanor sexual battery, punishable by a fine not exceeding 
two thousand dol lars ($2,000), or by imprisonment in a county jail not exceeding six months, or 
by both that fine and imprisonment. However, if the defendant was an employer and the victim 
was an employee of the defendant, the misdemeanor sexual battery shall be punishabl e by a 
fine not exceeding three thousand dollars ($3,000), by imprisonment in a county jail not 
exceeding six months, or by both that fine and imprisonment. Notwithstanding any other 
provision of law, any amount of a fine above two thousand dollars ($2,000 ) which is collected 
from a defendant for a violation of this subdivision shall be transmitted to the State Treasury 
and, upon appropriation by the Legislature, distributed to the Civil Rights Department  for the 
purpose of enforcement of the California Fai r Employment and Housing Act (Part 2.8 
(commencing with Section 12900) of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code), including, 
but not limited to, laws that proscribe sexual harassment in places of employment. However, in 
no event shall an amount over  two thousand dollars ($2,000) be transmitted to the State 
Treasury until all fines, including any restitution fines that may have been imposed upon the 
defendant, have been paid in full.  
(2) As used in this subdivision, “touches” means physical contact wi th another person, whether 
accomplished directly, through the clothing of the person committing the offense, or through 
the clothing of the victim.  
(f) As used in subdivisions (a), (b), (c), and (d), “touches” means physical contact with the skin of 
anothe r person whether accomplished directly or through the clothing of the person 
committing the offense.  
(g) As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings:  
(1) “Intimate part” means the sexual organ, anus, groin, or buttocks of any p erson, and the 
breast of a female.  
(2) “Sexual battery” does not include the crimes defined in Section 261 or 289.  
(3) “Seriously disabled” means a person with severe physical or sensory disabilities.  
(4) “Medically incapacitated” means a person who is inc apacitated as a result of prescribed 
sedatives, anesthesia, or other medication.  
(5) “Institutionalized” means a person who is located voluntarily or involuntarily in a hospital, 
medical treatment facility, nursing home, acute care facility, or mental hosp ital. 
(6) “Minor” means a person under 18 years of age.  

(h) This section shall not be construed to limit or prevent prosecution under any other law 
which also proscribes a course of conduct that also is proscribed by this section.  
(i) In the case of a felo ny conviction for a violation of this section, the fact that the defendant 
was an employer and the victim was an employee of the defendant shall be a factor in 
aggravation in sentencing.  
(j) A person who commits a violation of subdivision (a), (b), (c), or  (d) against a minor when the 
person has a prior felony conviction for a violation of this section shall be guilty of a felony, 
punishable by imprisonment in the state prison for two, three, or four years and a fine not 
exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10, 000).  
 
 
Statutory Rape (CA Penal Code, Chapter 1, Section 261.5)  
(a) Unlawful sexual intercourse is an act of sexual intercourse accomplished with a person who 
is not the spouse of the perpetrator, if the person is a minor. For the purposes of this section, a 
“minor” is a person under the age of 18 years and an “adult” is a person who is at least 18 years 
of age.  
(b) Any person who engages in an act of unlawful sexual intercourse with a minor who is not 
more than three years older or three years youn ger than the perpetrator, is guilty of a 
misdemeanor.  
(c) Any person who engages in an act of unlawful sexual intercourse with a minor who is more 
than three years younger than the perpetrator is guilty of either a misdemeanor or a felony, 
and shall be pun ished by imprisonment in a county jail not exceeding one year, or by 
imprisonment pursuant to subdivision (h) of Section 1170.  
(d) Any person 21 years of age or older who engages in an act of unlawful sexual intercourse 
with a minor who is under 16 years o f age is guilty of either a misdemeanor or a felony, and 
shall be punished by imprisonment in a county jail not exceeding one year, or by imprisonment 
pursuant to subdivision (h) of Section 1170 for two, three, or four years.  
 
Incest (CA Penal Code, Chapte r 1, Section 285)  
Persons being within the degrees of consanguinity within which marriages are declared by law 
to be incestuous and void, who intermarry with each other, or who being 14 years of age or 

older, commit fornication or adultery with each other,  are punishable by imprisonment in the 
state prison.  
 
Abuse: (CA Family Code, 6203 (definitions) and 6211)  
(a) For purposes of this act, “abuse” means any of the following:  
(1) To intentionally or recklessly cause or attempt to cause bodily injury.  
(2) Sexual assault.  
(3) To place a person in reasonable apprehension of imminent serious bodily injury to that 
person or to another.  
(4) To engage in any behavior that has been or could be enjoined pursuant to Section 6320.  
(b) Abuse is not limited to the actual infliction of physical injury or assault.  
   
“Domestic violence” is abuse perpetrated against any of the following persons:  
(a) A spouse or former spouse.  
(b) A cohabitant or former cohabitant, as defined in Section 6209.  
(c) A person with whom the respondent is having or has had a dating or engagement 
relationship.  
(d) A person with whom the respondent has had a child, where the presumption applies that 
the male parent is the father of the child of the female parent under the Uniform Parentage Act 
(Part 3 (commencing with Section 7600) of Division 12).  
(e) A child of a party or a child who is the subject of an action under the Uniform Parentage Act, 
where the presumption applies that the male parent is the father of the child to be protected.  
(f) Any other person related by consanguinity or affinity within the second degree.  
 
Domestic Violence/Dating Violence (CA Penal Code, Chapter 2, Section 273.5 and Section 243)  
(a) Any person who willfully inflicts corporal injury resulting in a traumatic conditi on upon a 
victim described in subdivision (b) is guilty of a felony, and upon conviction thereof shall be 
punished by imprisonment in the state prison for two, three, or four years, or in a county jail for 

not more than one year, or by a fine of up to six thousand dollars ($6,000), or by both that fine 
and imprisonment.  
(b) Subdivision (a) shall apply if the victim is or was one or more of the following:  
(1) The offender’s spouse or former spouse.  
(2) The offender’s cohabitant or former cohabitant.  
(3) The offender’s fiancé or fiancée, or someone with whom the offender has, or previously 
had, an engagement or dating relationship.  
(4) The mother or father of the offender’s child.  
 
Battery  
CA Penal Code 243(e)  
(1) When a battery (willful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of another) is 
committed against a spouse, a person with whom the defendant is cohabiting, a person who is 
the parent of the defendant’s child, former spouse, fiancé, or fiancée, or a person with whom 
the defendant current ly has, or has previously had, a dating or engagement relationship, the 
battery is punishable by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000), or by 
imprisonment in a county jail for a period of not more than one year, or by both that fine and 
impris onment.  
 
Stalking  
CA Penal Code, Chapter 2, Section 646.9  
Any person who willfully, maliciously, and repeatedly follows or willfully and maliciously 
harasses another person and who makes a credible threat with the intent to place that person 
in reasonable  fear for his or her safety, or the safety of his or her immediate family is guilty of 
the crime of stalking, punishable by imprisonment in a county jail for not more than one year, 
or by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both th at fine and 
imprisonment, or by imprisonment in the state prison.  
 
CA Penal Code, Chapter 2, Section 653m   

(a)Every person who, with intent to annoy, telephones or makes contact by means of an 
electronic communication device with another and addresses to o r about the other person any 
obscene language or addresses to the other person any threat to inflict injury to the person or 
property of the person addressed or any member of his or her family, is guilty of a 
misdemeanor. Nothing in this subdivision shall apply to telephone calls or electronic contacts 
made in good faith.  
(b) Every person who, with intent to annoy or harass, makes repeated telephone calls or makes 
repeated contact by means of an electronic communication device, or makes any combination 
of calls or contact, to another person is, whether or not conversation ensues from making the 
telephone call or contact by means of an electronic communication device, guilty of a 
misdemeanor. Nothing in this subdivision shall apply to telephon e calls or electronic contacts 
made in good faith or during the ordinary course and scope of business.  
 
Consent to Sexual Activity (CA Penal Code, Chapter 1, section 261.6  and section 261.7)  
a. Consent is positive cooperation in act or attitude pursuant to an  exercise of free will. The Person 
must act freely and voluntarily and have knowledge of the nature of the act or transaction 
involved.  
b. A current or previous dating or marital relationship shall not be sufficient to constitute consent 
where consent is at i ssue in a prosecution under section 261, 286, 287, or 289, or former section 
262 or 288a  
c. This section shall not affect the admissibility of evidence or the burden of proof on the issue of 
consent.  
In prosecutions under Section 261, 286, 287, or 289, or for mer Section 262 or 288a, in which 
consent is at issue, evidence that the victim suggested, requested, or otherwise communicated 
to the defendant that the defendant use a condom or other birth control device, without 
additional evidence of consent, is not s ufficient to constitute consent.   

